The Project Gutenberg eBook of On the Origin of Species, by Charles Darwin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: On the Origin of Species
       6th Edition

Author: Charles Darwin

Release Date: December, 1999 [eBook #2009]
[Most recently updated: March 13, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Sue Asscher and David Widger

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES ***

There are several editions of this ebook in the Project Gutenberg
collection. Various characteristics of each ebook are listed to aid in
selecting the preferred file.
Click on any of the filenumbers below to quickly view each ebook.

1228    1859, First Edition
22764   1860, Second Edition
2009    1872, Sixth Edition, considered the definitive edition.




On the Origin of Species

BY MEANS OF NATURAL SELECTION,

OR THE PRESERVATION OF FAVOURED RACES IN THE STRUGGLE FOR LIFE.


By Charles Darwin, M.A., F.R.S.,

Author of “The Descent of Man,” etc., etc.

Sixth London Edition, with all Additions and Corrections.




“But with regard to the material world, we can at least go so far as
this—we can perceive that events are brought about not by insulated
interpositions of Divine power, exerted in each particular case, but by
the establishment of general laws.”—Whewell: “Bridgewater Treatise”.

“The only distinct meaning of the word ‘natural’ is STATED, FIXED or
SETTLED; since what is natural as much requires and presupposes an
intelligent agent to render it so, i.e., to effect it continually or at
stated times, as what is supernatural or miraculous does to effect it
for once.”—Butler: “Analogy of Revealed Religion”.

“To conclude, therefore, let no man out of a weak conceit of sobriety,
or an ill-applied moderation, think or maintain, that a man can search
too far or be too well studied in the book of God’s word, or in the
book of God’s works; divinity or philosophy; but rather let men
endeavour an endless progress or proficience in both.”—Bacon:
“Advancement of Learning”.




AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE PROGRESS OF OPINION ON THE ORIGIN OF
SPECIES, PREVIOUSLY TO THE PUBLICATION OF THE FIRST EDITION OF THIS
WORK.


I will here give a brief sketch of the progress of opinion on the
Origin of Species. Until recently the great majority of naturalists
believed that species were immutable productions, and had been
separately created. This view has been ably maintained by many authors.
Some few naturalists, on the other hand, have believed that species
undergo modification, and that the existing forms of life are the
descendants by true generation of pre existing forms. Passing over
allusions to the subject in the classical writers (Aristotle, in his
“Physicae Auscultationes” (lib.2, cap.8, s.2), after remarking that
rain does not fall in order to make the corn grow, any more than it
falls to spoil the farmer’s corn when threshed out of doors, applies
the same argument to organisation; and adds (as translated by Mr. Clair
Grece, who first pointed out the passage to me), “So what hinders the
different parts (of the body) from having this merely accidental
relation in nature? as the teeth, for example, grow by necessity, the
front ones sharp, adapted for dividing, and the grinders flat, and
serviceable for masticating the food; since they were not made for the
sake of this, but it was the result of accident. And in like manner as
to other parts in which there appears to exist an adaptation to an end.
Wheresoever, therefore, all things together (that is all the parts of
